.TH DeeZ 1 "12 June 2014" "1.0" "DeeZ Manual"

.SH NAME
DeeZ

.SH DESCRIPTION
DeeZ is a tool for compressing SAM/BAM files.

.SH INSTALLATION
$ git clone https://bitbucket.org/compbio/dz.git
.br
$ cd dz && make
.br
You need at least g++ 4.4 to compile the sources.

.SH SYNOPSIS
Compression: 
.br
$ deez -r [reference] [input.sam] -o [output]
.br
Decompression: 
.br
$ deez -r [reference] [input.dz] -o [output] ([region])
.br

.SH OPTIONS

.SS GENERAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B -h,--help
Prints this help file.

.TP
.BI -t,--threads " t"
Set up the number of threads DeeZ may use for compression and decompression.
.br
Default value: 4

.TP
.B -!,--force
Force overwrite of exiting files.

.SS COMPRESSION AND DECOMPRESSION OPTIONS

.TP
.BI -r,--reference " file|directory"
Specify the FASTA reference file.
Chromosome names in the SAM and FASTA files must match. 
Also, instead of one big FASTA file, DeeZ supports reference lookup in the given directory for chr*.fa files, 
where chr* is the chromosome ID from the SAM file.

.TP
.BI -c,--stdout
Compress/decompress to the stdout.

.TP
.BI -o,--output " file"
Compress/decompress to the 
.I file

.TP
.BI -l,--lossy " p"
Set lossy parameter 
.I p
for quality lossy encoding (for more information, please check out SCALCE at http://scalce.sourceforge.net/).

.TP
.BI -q,--quality " mode"
If 
.I mode 
is 1 or samcomp, DeeZ will use sam_comp quality model to encode the qualities. Quality random access is not supported on those files. 

.SS STATISTICS OPTIONS

.TP
.BI -f,--withflag " flag"
Decompress only mappings which have 
.I flag 
bits set.

.TP
.BI -F,--withoutflag " flag"
Decompress only mappings which do not have 
.I flag 
bits set.

.TP
.B -S,--stats
Display mapping statistics (needs DeeZ file as input).

.SS SORTING OPTIONS

.TP
.B -s,--sort
Sort the input SAM/BAM file by mapping location.

.TP
.BI -M,--sortmem " size"
Maximum memory used for sorting. 
.br
Default value: 1G

.SH CONTACT & SUPPORT
Please report the bugs through DeeZ's web page at http://deez-compression.sourceforge.net,
or by mailing one of the authors.

.SH AUTHORS
Ibrahim Numanagic (inumanag@sfu.ca) 
.br
Faraz Hach (fhach@cs.sfu.ca)

.SH LICENCE
Copyright (c) 2013, 2014, Simon Fraser University, Indiana University Bloomington. All rights reserved.
.br
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
Neither the name of the Simon Fraser University, Indiana University Bloomington nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.br
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

